welcome to connecting with coincidence
with psychiatrist Bernard David biteman
MD Dr biteman is the founder of The
Coincidence project the project
encourages people like you to tell each
other coincidence stories to learn more
about Dr biteman's work put connecting
with coincidence in your web browser
you'll find his book his Psychology
today blog and the interviews from this
podcast and now your host Bernard
biteman MD
welcome to connecting with coincidence I
am Bernard biteman I'm a psychiatrist
I study meaningful coincidences my book
called meaningful coincidences how
synchronicity and Serendipity happen uh
is available at a link for those of you
on YouTube below
and uh we're talking about something
that the psychiatrist doesn't address
quite now but we got a problem here on
Earth ladies and gentlemen uh and it
tends to be denied
people don't want to pay attention to it
a lot of different ways of avoiding it
and we are here to say the evidence is
really strong we are in the midst of the
sixth mass extinction of Life on our
planet
a mass extinction is a short period of
geological time in which a high
percentage of biodiversity
distinct species bacteria fungi plants
mammals birds reptiles amphibians fish
invertebrates
and vertebrates like us die out
and this definition it's important to
note that in geological time a short
period of time can be a thousands
thousands or even millions of years the
planter has experienced five previous
Max extinctions
the last one occurring uh 665.5 million
years ago which wiped out the dinosaurs
as everybody kind of remembers
experts now believe we are in the midst
of the sixth mass extinction and unlike
previous mass extinctions
caused by natural phenomena this sixth
one is driven by us by human activity
primarily the they're not limited to the
unsustainable use of land water and
energy use and the resulting climate
change
we have two very smart guys here who are
coming at this question in different
ways and uh it's the first time they're
ever talking with each other but they
got their hearts in common and their
minds are really good as many of you
know who know each one of these first is
Chris Bates I'll introduce and then Dan
Siegel
Chris is a professor emeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University
where he taught for 33 years
key thing about Chris besides the living
classroom was where I got introduced to
him and the connections between minds of
the students and his very remarkable
that one and also Chris has the
distinction of Taken has taken LSD I
think 73 times and under control
conditions high doses and explored not
explored Consciousness and he's Come
Away with some ideas about how to
mitigate or what's going to happen with
this mass extinction we are now facing
Dan Siegel is a clinical professor of
Psychiatry at the UCLA School of
Medicine and founding director and
founding the co-director of the
mindfulness awareness Research Center at
UCLA
he is executive director of the mine
site Institute which focuses on the
development of mine site teaches Insight
empathy and integration and his latest
book just came out this month
intra-connected
is just about how this whole thing we
are in is interconnected including you
and I and me and them and you what we
are they together kind of thing we are
in this all of us and because each of
these
men come from somewhat different
perspectives but again for me their
hearts and mind have some overlap I've
asked them to join me with a discussion
about their views about what is coming
for Humanity and what we might be able
to do about that so we'll start off with
each of each of them saying something
about and their answer to this question
and then the dialogue will begin between
the two of them so Chris let's start
with you and then we'll go to Dan
oh I was hoping we were going to start
with Dan first we can start with Dan
first okay okay Dan thank you you're on
uh okay well whatever I'm I'm happy to
go with how whatever sequence
um
which probably relates in some ways to
uh part of what I'll talk about but you
know my background is trained as a
scientist and then as a physician and
then as a mental health practitioner uh
as a psychiatrist
um and then working as a researcher in
the area of relationships and the
development of the self
and then becoming more an educator
really teaching people in different
Realms to the work of mental health of
Education of parenting of
policy and government
organizational functioning things like
that uh and then I worked uh starting
around 30 years ago to bring different
Sciences together into one framework
that EO Wilson later would the term he
used we would apply to that called
consilience of finding the common ground
and so initially it was all the
different scientific disciplines
everything from math and physics up to
you know sociology and anthropology and
everything in between but then it opened
up at this field of interpersonal
neurobiology to invite all ways of
knowing so religious studies spiritual
practices contemplative practices
indigenous knowledge of looking at
poetry at music and art dance
um so you know any pursuit of
exploration of Truth is invited into the
conversation and you know we now have 80
textbooks in the Norton series that that
I founded and
um the the focus is on
um reality but one aspect of reality we
look at is the human mind and we see the
mind as broader than the brain so unlike
how Bernie you and I were trained uh in
Psychiatry and in medicine since the
time of Hippocrates 2500 years ago where
the mind was thought of as a synonym
basically for brain activity and William
James the grandfather of modern
psychology kind of reaffirmed that in
um in interpersonal neurobiology we say
Well that's
true but not the whole story
that the brain is really important but
it's actually broader than the brain
this thing called the mind and in fact
it's bigger than the body
so then in these last 30 years there's
been a fascinating journey to
look at what um
the mind is from the perspective of what
the proposal is is that it's an emergent
property of energy flow that is a rising
um both within the individual and in the
relationality of
the individual with you know other
people and with nature so people on the
planet
and in that sense uh the mind has
features such as subjective experience
it has Consciousness it has information
processing but a fourth facet of the
mind is the emergent property that's
been assessed by the mathematics of
complex systems uh studied in the 1980s
so pretty recently
um it's the emergent property meaning
the interaction of elements of a system
give rise to something larger than the
elements themselves
um so we see all these properties as
emergent but one of them this fourth
property is the self-organizing emergent
property of a complex system and we see
it as the system being embodied and
relational energy flow and this
self-organizing process uh optimizes its
uh its unfolding through a process of
differentiating and linking and when
optimal self-organization happens this
what we'll call integration this balance
of differentiation linkage it leads to a
kind of flow that has five qualities
that feel with the texture of Harmony
and those are flexibility F adaptability
a coherence which is holding together
well over time C being energized with a
sense of Vitality e and stable meaning
reliable
so this faces flow is a way you would
describe basically optimal
self-organization
and the proposal from 30 years ago was
that that was the basis of well-being
and that when there's deviation from
integration this integrative
self-organizing
process toward Harmony you get to either
chaos or rigidity so in terms of the
question of
[Music]
human life and individual's life you can
look at for example attachment
relationships and see that when they're
integrative
um the integrated sharing the honoring
of differences and promoting of
compassionate linkages within a
parent-child relationship actually is a
relational flow of energy and
information that is integrated that
stimulates the growth of integration of
the child's nervous system and so in the
textbook the developing mind I wrote now
in its Third Edition you know there's
repeated support in the empirical
scientific literature that integration
is the basis of well-being Smith and
colleagues in 2015 show that every
measure of well-being you could find is
predicted by basically how
interconnected something called the
connectome is
um and then in the similar vein in
psychiatric disorders anyone with a
mental suffering uh is can be revealed
as chaos or rigidity and every study
ever done of the brains of individuals
with psychiatric disorders have impaired
integration so that's that's interesting
and then positive interventions like
compassion training and mindfulness
training those lead to increased growth
and integration in the brain in in the
very ways that studies for example of
trauma show that integration is impaired
in in children who are abused or
neglected so all that being said
integration then is seen as the the base
of well-being so in terms of this
question of what's happening on the
planet the many pandemics we face I mean
one is the pandemic of loss of
biodiversity known as this this mass
extinction
but other pandemics include racism and
social injustice the covid-19 virus even
you can look at issues of polarization
and misinformation the pandemic of
loneliness and modern culture
um and you know the addiction we have to
screens and also just climate the
climate disaster all of those are
examples of chaos and rigidity and all
of those I'll have you consider are
either worsened by or even caused by and
here's the proposal for our discussion
that the the way the self is constructed
by the human mind because of the
vulnerabilities of the human brain we
create in modern culture for a drive to
certainty what we're going to name is
the solo self a view of this Center of
experience as existing only inside the
individual and whether that individual
is by themselves or in individuals like
them so it's like a plural solo self
um you can basically see that the heart
of these pandemics
um including Extinction you know might
be this solo self and if that's true as
you point out
you know this condition of the
extinction looks like it's due to what
the human species is doing so the
proposal in the book interconnected
um and I can show you the the subtitle
so you can kind of read it for yourself
you know it's interconnected but it's
the idea of an identity as mui me plus
we as the integration of self identity
and belonging so the idea there is that
you can
find a way to see how the self develops
in the individual and in modern culture
and that's what I do in the book through
a lifespan
examination of how self-defined as you
know a center of experience that
includes subjective experience
perspective and agency you can remember
that with the acronym Spa that this
really scientific view of how the
self-develops as separate and modern
culture
it's in fact with what the invitation is
from contemplative practices from
thousands of years and Indigenous wisdom
from thousands of years so that here on
this unseated land of the tongvan the
Chumash in Southern California where I
am you know the teachings were always
about humans who are part of nature but
in modern culture there's a drive to go
from that verb-like fluid
intra-connected meaning we're connected
within a whole not just interconnected
where I'm connected to you and that's
the inter the between that's where the
the word interconnected is useful we
speak from the subjective experience
perspective and agency of the whole
w-h-o-l-e the whole of of reality and
then in doing that then what you see is
indigenous teachings have invited this
contemplative practices have invited it
um and and this discussion in the book
is really just saying hand science join
with those ancient invitations
to see how
the human mind's drive for certainty
makes us view identity as an entity
a noun-like thing rather than embracing
uncertainty and opening to the verb-like
reality of a more fluid identity and a
belonging that is universal and then
what the hope is and this is I think a
realistic idealism in the sense that
it's an optimistic view yes but it says
Humanity
can in fact construct a self that is
interconnected as we and that can lead
to
actions for the greater good that are as
if you had stubbed your own toe of your
body you take care of your toe we would
see the whole living world as who we are
so that's that's in a nutshell that's
the notion that's how it fits in with
this discussion beautiful beautiful
Chris comments questions and and you
Dan that really was beautiful I mean
that was beautifully summarized and I
just really love the unfolding of layers
and layers and layers of your research
and the way you harness so many people's
research to and bring that into into
focus and uh I'm sitting here
uh without any of the scientific
background a difference and get that in
a minute but
it in total agreement with what you're
saying just being over and over from my
side of experience everything you're
saying makes perfectly good sense the
balance of integration of individual and
larger Fields within which we are
contextualized
um the ways in which we push against the
limits at those different times and
where we're being pushed now uh I find
it fascinating I'm I feel so completely
aligned with what you're saying and yet
I come to that with with a different
with a different story coming to it uh
not primarily a theory based story or a
theory heavy story a research story but
an ex purely an experiential Journey you
know that my psychedelic journey is
purely experiential so that it in
different ways I experience the
rupturing of that core self that you
talk about and then the unfolding into a
larger Dynamic field Consciousness
repeatedly systematically and then
experiencing that field Consciousness
itself
um
dissolve like the small collectors have
dissolved into yet another deeper level
of field Consciousness where
uh
I so often wish that I that I had a PhD
in physics and and astrology uh as
astronomy to better understand
assimilate many of the things that I was
shown taken into but it was just a an
educated Layman's
dissolving
into the my phenomenological sense was
dissolving into
fields of Consciousness within fields of
consciousness
and being uh
acquiring insights are being given
teachings about how those feels
self-organize how they work
I mean the living class in the classroom
Bernie you mentioned that that book
which was basically my attempt to
understand the fields of Consciousness
that we're connecting my students and my
courses and me is there is kind of the
spark plug within it and the ways in
which my spiritual journey was impacting
them through these mysterious channels
of intercommunication that the field of
Consciousness is
that entire book was downloaded in 10
minutes in one session
I had been pondering the riddle for a
long time but it just came through
cleared 10 minutes in one session and
took years of course to open it up and
to do the research for it
uh
and yet out of such a different
different itinerary I mean I've been a
professor of religious studies I teach a
intro world religion courses Eastern
religions Buddhism psychic religion
transpersonal studies you know that that
kind of stuff
thank you
outside of this modest academic frame
the experiential Journey that I
undertook starting in 79 going to 99.
would lead me to such experiences that
are in so much in harmony with what Dan
what what you're describing Dan the your
way of understanding the the larger
patterns of organization that come up
from underneath
I don't know that I have much to offer
in the way of ameliorating
this pan this Extinction crisis that
we've entered I have from these
experiences a certain historical
framework that has that I use that has
been given to me to understand what's
happening a certain uh conviction
that we do make it through this crisis
that it it doesn't end up becoming an
Extinction event that we do make it
through this crisis and again I I offer
that
purely on an experiential basis not on
an academic basis not on a scientific
basis but simply because in these deep
States Of Consciousness time can be
penetrated
trans-temporal States Of Consciousness
emerge in all the contemplative and
spiritual traditions and they can be
harnessed in a way and penetrated and
sustained psychedelic practice so that
part of my story is having experienced
the crisis the death and rebirth crisis
of humanity from the future
not from the present going forward but
that but also simultaneously from the
future as something that has already
happened
and that doesn't make sense of course
within linear time but within
psychedelic worlds
that becomes possible
um
it definitely becomes possible and it's
understandable and the fluidity of time
is becoming a a kind of a common
discussion thing about uh precognition
is uh one way to get into it Dan you
were going to say something I think
well I mean no I think it's beautiful
Chris thank you and Bernie thanks for
having us on you're welcome um you know
to have this discussion I you know
there's so much
um richness in what you're talking about
Chris and also
um
in in doing this consilience
uh strategy that is where you really
have an open mind about
realizing there are many ways of knowing
you know so that the teachings from
indigenous cultures yeah some of whom
use plant medicines you know
um to open their Consciousness for
thousands of years you know have
insights into the way systems function
that on one level sees the patterns and
patterns of the patterns you know
um that Gregory Bateson would talk about
and
in looking at these thousands of year
old traditions one thing is fascinating
is from independent cultures that never
communicate with each other they came up
with the same conclusions yeah uh so
that's just fascinating the the second
thing is that you have contemplative
practices also thousands of years old
that
in their own independent ways have come
up with the same exact conclusions the
systems nature of our deep intra I would
call it intra-connected nature and
um
so then you have to ask from a
scientific point of view where you're
always challenging your assumptions and
challenging your hypotheses and doubting
everything you know so it can sort of
drive your little mad but it's a good
practice and Adam Grant has a great book
called think again about inviting you
how to do that yeah but in science we do
that and so from a scientific point of
view we would say that wow you know
indigenous wisdom is very much
consilient with Systems Science and
contemplative practices very much
consilient with system science but then
you realize that
in much of what we do in modern culture
and modern education there's linear
thinking about a leads to B leads to C
you focus deeply on the details and some
of that is incredibly useful like
there's a virus killing people let's
look at its particular molecules let's
make an antibody and let's make it so we
can have RNA that matches it in some way
and let's make a vaccine so now okay we
have a vaccination based on RNA that we
discovered because we were linear
thinkers so we want we need to embrace
linear thinking however yeah
you know in there is another way to
think in systems terms and you know this
practice that uh that that called The
Wheel of awareness where you take the
concept of integration and take the the
consilient concept that Consciousness is
needed for change and then you bring
those two consilient Notions integration
is well-being Consciousness needed for
change and then you integrate
consciousness
so I did this with my patients then I
did it for my students and they were
doing with their patients people started
getting better so I started doing the
workshops before the viral pandemic hit
you know my my sister counted this up I
did this with 50 000 people in person 50
000. and I would get the responses and
you know what
when they were in the basically you
distinguish you differentiate the Hub of
this metaphoric wheel as pure awareness
there's the knowing of Consciousness
like if I say hello you have both the
hello and the knowing I said hello so we
put the knowing in the hub we put the
the known of in this case sound of hello
on the rim and anyway people do the
practice and you can do it for my
website for free and yeah
um and so when when we do this when
people bend the spoke of attention that
they're moving around the rim as part of
the practice into the Hub
the common statements are
oh my God I'm connected in a way I've
never felt connected my sense of a
separate self dissolves time disappears
you know love is there God I'm with the
universe there's just this
eternity and infinity you know this kind
of thing over and over and over again
even people you might say well it's a
selected group of 50 000 people wanted
to hear you so lucky I've had people
dragged there who didn't even want to be
there or people in I've done it at
parliaments you know where people did
not want to be at this workshop and they
were forced by their government to do it
or their spouses brought them and they
had the same experience they could be
never having meditated before or running
monasteries and they have the same
experience so what what you'll see in
this book called aware or this book
called Mind or this book interconnected
is
a question
why is it on the rim
people feel locked into time like a
thought comes and goes or a memory is of
a particular time in your life but in
the hub it's timeless
so I did a deep search I happen to be
teaching with about 150 physicists
at this meeting for a week so I asked
them you know what's what's energy of
course because I'm fascinated with that
but what's time and you know this is a
controversial thing to say anything in
science is controversial you can say a
and someone will say no it's B and you
someone says no it's C so you have to be
ready for that but for some of the
physicists just to quote some of them
there are two realms
and this was on the cover of Scientific
American in in July of 2018 the month
before my book aware came out and I was
so relieved because I thought people are
going to think I'm nuts because aware
was all about these two Realms but the
fact is according to these physicists
that I was with
and subsequently reading a lot about
that view and in Scientific American
certainly said it
in the large object world that Newton
studied 350 years ago macro States large
objects there's something called the
second law of Thermodynamics and that
law says that as things unfold they tend
to fall into entropy fall toward
Randomness they fall apart well that law
only applies according to these
physicists to the Newtonian macrostate
world
a hundred years ago
the um
capacity and Technology to study small
things like electrons and photons led to
the realization that the microstate
realm didn't have that property of the
second law of Thermodynamics and it's
that awareness that things are moving
with what's called an arrow of time we
probably name as time
so it has a feeling of linearity to in
the Newtonian macrostate realm but just
like you can walk on land and has
certain properties you can jump into the
water and you swim and it's different
properties that's a different realm one
reality two Realms water and land the
same thing is true physicists tell us
that there is a microstate realm where
because the second law of Thermodynamics
doesn't apply there is no error of time
and there is no need in the equations
that are super accurate about
probability in the microstate realm
there's no need for a t variable you
don't have a time variable it's Timeless
so I went to the physicist and I said if
I draw it out like this does this work
they go that's what it would be if you
drew it out they hadn't drawn out but I
drew it out so I said okay well then the
Mind matches on to this for these 50 000
you know people that did it and those
that responded it seems to match where
pure awareness you're dropping into the
quantum realm where it's time less and
in that sense it's you know whether you
talk about being able to go to the past
future or present it becomes meaningless
and self and other starts to shift
because
the experience in the quantum Realm
is verb like unfoldings that are
massively connected to one another the
Nobel Prize was just given in 2022 for
entanglement being proven meaning it's
non-locality that in the quantum realm
yeah you know there's there's uh the the
the the experience in the Newtonian
realm of separation and time and space
doesn't exist there things are massively
connected especially across space which
doesn't have it doesn't impede
relational connections so I say all that
because you know I've been writing about
this I've had neuroscientists chase me
down hallways after a lecture I give
saying stop talking like that stop
talking like that I said what stop
talking like what they said why would
you talk about quantum physics and the
mind I said well if the mind is an
emerging property of energy
and the physicists that study energy
more than anyone else in the world tell
us there are two Realms then I'm just
saying it's a possibility that these
Realms explain things like psychedelic
use yeah that you drop out of the
Newtonian thing so when people heard
this they had me go to Newton's house in
England where the original Apple Tree is
there and we did the wheel of awareness
around the apple tree they made a
documentary film of it it's hilarious
but we've paid our homage to a Newton
because I say to people look when you
leave this Workshop get in your
Newtonian body get in your Newtonian car
when you see a red light Crest on the
Newtonian breaks and stop your car in
time because if you don't you will
become one with everything in the
intersection
there's a relativistic world where
you're in a body and there's the
universal as contemplative teachers like
technology would say so this just is a
scientific adding to the discussion and
doesn't take the place of the saved
there are these two Realms and listen
when people do the wheel of awareness
and are given the mystical experiences
scale they get the same ratings as if
they were on psilocybin yeah yeah
okay
Dan I love hearing you riff man I mean
that's just beautiful everything you're
that you're doing and putting together
is just beautiful Rift is right that's a
good word for it and he just he just he
just needs a little music which his son
could provide
alexeagle.com
I looked oh really exactly yeah his
son's a musician now I'm gonna I'm gonna
do it down to like uh somewhere between
that traffic jam at the red light about
to step on the Break
um and bring us to Chris's classroom
where I've really first got introduced
to Chris and try there to talk about
intra connection and experiences Chris
had in that classroom which was my
introduction to how uh another
introduction how it's happening right
now not just between two people or not a
psychedelic out into the mystery but
Chris would be somehow all doing his own
riffing about something as a as teacher
as teacher and people would come up to
him the students would come up to him
afterwards and say you have just
answered a problem that I have been
dealing with psychologically
and how that began to be what I thought
now is what you're talking about about
intra connection that it's one it's one
we there it's one mind of some kind in
that classroom something in your terms
Quantum begins to happen where Chris is
intuitively subconsciously coming up
with something students need without
knowing that he's doing it yeah
I uh it's one of the reasons one of the
many reasons I'm so comfortable with
what you're saying Dan because it it's
so coherent with what my experience has
been in the classroom an understanding
of uh a growing understanding of the
porosity of Mind of the
um the feel nature of our individual
Consciousness the feel nature of the of
the collective Consciousness the way
that individuals when they come together
and focus their intention they create a
field
and that that classes develop Fields
over over decades they get stronger and
stronger the more more for genetic
Fields the more students study this
stuff around this particular teacher
this field gets stronger and
uh it became
what happened for me is completely
against my will and without my guidance
I I started uh filling in blanks in my
lecture it's just opportunities to
explain some principle I was explaining
with examples that just came out of my
imagination and students started come up
coming up to me and they say this is
exactly what happened to me this week or
this is exactly what happened to my
mother and this kept happening over and
over I thought well first I thought well
okay chance you know okay but it kept
happening so much and then
over the course of time as my spiritual
practice deepened which happened to be a
psychedelic practice but it's irrelevant
that it's psychedelicia it's really
about spiritual practice it's my
spiritual practice deepened this this
access to my students mind deepened and
began to zero in it seemed on places
where they were hurt or where they were
wounded or where they were
held in Block until the next stage of
their life and and working together or
just being in the classroom with me
while I was opening up to these
very intense very large very pure states
of awareness it just began to
Cascade around me in in my classroom and
so I developed what I call and I know
it's just just metaphor I think talk
about the atomistic the Newtonian
approach to teaching and the atomistic
which really is about individual cells
communicating with individual cells
transmitting across the distance
versus what I call a Quantum teaching
teaching within the reality of fields
teaching with an awareness that my mind
has an active influence in the minds of
my students before the class even begins
to meet
and taking responsibility for this
mind-to-mind Field Effect especially
when you're dealing with a mind which is
carrying the kind of energy that starts
to flow in you from doing very intense
spiritual practice in my case a
psychedelic practice
so
I developed and I really
um Juanita Brown's work in Cafe
conversations were very helpful to me to
how to catalyze and how to harness this
Collective energy that is in the room
and how to harness it in conversations
and how to distill it in in written form
um
yeah I mean to me the and in the living
classroom I don't talk about
psychedelics at all the the back story
is I was doing this psychedelic practice
in private it began to impact my
students this is how I worked it all out
uh and one third of the book are student
essays it's things that they they shared
with me
um
and I didn't want psychedelics to get in
the way of you know grammar school
teachers High School teachers college
teachers it's it's about the nature of
Consciousness it's about the nature of
mind it's about as you say Dan a Quantum
understanding of mine a Quantum
envisioning of the human potential and
it doesn't negate at all the atomic
truth does it you know the the reality
of individual mind I know things that
they don't they want things that I know
in the exchange of stuff
uh
what I what I hear from what you're
saying Chris and the classroom
and I'm wondering about this with Dan
and I get this experience at dance where
it appears that uh your Consciousness
Chris and certainly Daniel your
Consciousness when you're with a patient
because I know that as well you begin to
form a little unit of togetherness that
begins to be intra-connected that we we
share some responsibility each of us who
have some awareness of the awareness of
being in this group
mind with people and that what our
thoughts do and our emotions do and what
are the things that we end up might not
be so conscious of can do is influence
that field so there's a responsibility
involved in our own thinking about
what's going on here and perhaps what we
want to have happen
what do you think about that one yeah
that's so beautiful and you know Chris
it's uh it's great to hear this you know
some people would use the phrase
relational sensing or relational fields
and with the metabol and Peter sangee uh
and the group from MIT you know we're
trying to figure out how to study those
things in a classroom
um so we we talk about generative social
fields that that and we've picked out
several teachers that seem to create
exactly what you're talking about in a
classroom we've then brought them
together and then we ask them very
directly what are you doing because
everyone realizes when they walk in that
room they can feel it and the teachers
say the same thing they have no idea
they they just do it so we we're making
films of them and then we're going to
study the films because they can't
articulate it yeah break it down you
know so so you know when when Michael
Faraday came up with electromagnetic
fields that you could not see with your
eyes people thought he was nuts right
but now all of our electronics are based
on these invisible fields and my dear
friend John O'Donoghue you know we used
to teach together a lot and he would
call himself a Mystic and the people
came to study with him you know the
mystics so I said John what's a Mystic
he said it's someone who believes in the
reality of the invisible
you know and it's a beautiful way of
describing it it really because it
wasn't my background he was a you know
Catholic priest and a Mystic and a poet
and a philosopher but uh it wasn't my
background and he didn't have a
background in science but it really
teaching with him over all those years
really changed me because I realized the
true scientific stance
is to say you cannot see visibly
everything that is real
so even with the system stuff at MIT you
know we're trying to say well what are
relational Fields you know is it just
the feeling you get as an individual
from the way other individuals reacting
or is there an actual field we don't
have an answer to that but I think the
the um
experiences are fascinating and I was
recently on a trip in the Grand Canyon
and you know you go down the canyon and
you're with rocks that were formed you
know 1.8 billion years ago yeah so you
get a whole different sense of you know
the term geological time but with the
humans that were on the trip you know
some were saying you know how could it
happen
um that I get a communication from a
relative like that's 10 000 miles away
someone's six someone had an accident
someone's dying whatever and I know it
and then I find out later I knew it
exactly when it was happening and I said
well no one knows why but that kind of
very specific thing might be explained
by entanglement this idea of
non-locality that if your minds are in a
relationship with another person's mind
basically if that's really a process of
energy flow and since energy has these
this Quantum property that's now been
proven with the Nobel Prize you know
that non-locality that is entanglement
exists where Newtonian spatial
separation doesn't really change the
relationality of something yeah so it's
not like what Einstein was worried that
it was spooky action at a distance he
called it but it isn't it it isn't that
something's flowing from here to there
so fast it's faster than the speed of
light it's that there is no such thing
as spatial separation so that's been
proven now and it like in a linear
Newtonian way you go that's not possible
it's not possible well we have to drop
out of the that way way of limited
thinking so then then when you see and
and I think Michael pollan's book had to
change your mind on psychedelics you
know
the very last paragraph he says no one
really knows how these work but maybe it
has something to do with that Quantum
stuff you know so I wrote to him and I
said well here's an entire book on that
Quantum stuff you know uh the book of
called aware
um and you know there's a beautiful book
called you matter more than you think
you know the quantum approach to social
change and very carefully this was a
Nobel Prize winner did this very
carefully she
um uh she really it's Karen Karen
O'Brien is the author you know she very
carefully says this may not be true but
it might be true let's apply the the
findings in quantum physics to social
change
and it relates to everything we're
talking about of the sixth Extinction
and what it does is it allows us you
know and when I was around Newton's
Apple Tree you could feel it it allows
us to honor linear thinking in the
macrostate world and realize you know
stop the car to red light and all that
stuff and at the same time what it does
is it gives us a pathway as Joanna Macy
says you know in in she uses the term
the great turning meaning let's get away
from the great unraveling of the sixth
Extinction and let's turn the way
humanity is so when she read the book
interconnected she was saying you know
this is the evolution and the revolution
we need and she had always written about
we need a Quantum change in
Consciousness now what does that mean I
think that means the linear solo self
has had its day
it's created business as usual which
means you know if I'm in a body and this
is all it is I better get as many toys
as possible I better make as much money
as possible but then when I get my toys
and get my money I realize I don't
really feel much meaning or
happiness or anything so I better get
more toys more money and now if I can
build a factory I don't care the
pollution it's going to create because
I'm going to make so much stuff you're
gonna want my stuff because I'm put out
ads telling you you really need my stuff
you buy my stuff I get your money you
get this stuff and it isn't enough for
you need to buy more stuff so I produce
more Stuff Etc so let's call that
business as usual
and so we're destroying the planet with
that
because the fundamental
notion of modern culture in that view
is the solo self the self only exists in
your body and this separation leads to
so much unconscious angst and and
despair that it's driven to a
materialistic acquisition approach to
meaning and life which is totally
unsatisfying and becomes a kind of an
addiction to things that completely make
you feel unsatisfied but you keep that
path so
yeah the notion that we could actually
have this Quantum change Quantum would
mean yeah a big change but literally
from a scientific point of view it means
getting out of the Newtonian
illusion of a separate self which
unfortunately in modern culture we're
going to name
could be
actually a lethal lie
so this becomes more than oh Chris your
explorations of you know what matters in
your own LSD Journeys or for Michael
Pollan
who was new to it you know to say look
all these things basically get you in
touch with love and that's one of the
most common things people say in the hub
of the wheel so I was teaching in a
parliament once and they were having all
sorts of tensions so they had me do a
day-long workshop with the
parliamentarians and you know we did the
wheel of awareness and during the break
um everyone's having snacks and one of
the parliamentarians comes over and he
goes Dan you know I didn't share during
the sharing time I said yeah I noticed
he goes do you want to know why I didn't
share I said sure why didn't you share
he goes do you know that part of the
wheel practice when you bend the spoke
around into the Hub I say yeah I know
that part and he goes and he slows down
his eyes get filled with tears and he
goes
I have never felt
so much love before in my life I've
never felt so connected to to everyone
and everything
there's the silence
and I said
so you didn't want to share that and he
goes oh no no no he goes if I said love
they and he points over to his
parliamentarian colleagues he said they
would think I was weak
so there's a silence we're just kind of
staring each other's eyes are all welled
up with tears and I said I get it you
didn't want to Pure weak it was no no I
said so can I ask you a question you go
sure I said
so when you're making federal law
when you're making National policies
are you leaving love out of the
reasoning
and then his eyes get really really big
and he goes
and he runs over to them right now this
is a guy who never meditated before in
his life I'm you know this experience
was new for him obviously from what he
was saying
but you can only imagine that this not
being in touch with this core aspect
which feels like it's a threat of the
tapestry of reality that love is this
vital force that if people in positions
of power like a parliamentarian in a
country you know think love is weak you
know then we're in trouble you know
we're in deep trouble so the idea then
of you know in this case it's the wheel
of awareness but even just the concept
that you know we can actually tap into
this deeper source of awareness that has
love at its core I'm very hopeful that
we can actually turn this around in time
I know we have a very brief window of
time probably less than a decade
and so there's an urgency to this but
while there's an urgency to it it's an
ancient message that somehow modern
culture has ignored so my deepest hope
is that adding a little bit of the
science to say Hey you know this is the
problem and maybe as a physician I say
look if someone comes in to me and has
pain in the bottom of their foot and
they're limping and I go what's going on
they go I don't know I have a pain in
the butt of my food I'm limping I say
here come come here let me take off your
shoe let me take off your sock let me
look at the soul of your feet
and let me oh whoa whoa whoa there's a
splinter will you let me take the
splinter out oh this is Hunter yeah take
the splinter out and now they walk
straight their back isn't hurting
anymore the pain is gone we have a
splinter in modern culture in the soul
of society
that is the separate self
and my deepest hope is that this
conversation about interconnectedness
and we you know this meat plus we is you
don't have to get rid of the individual
you don't have to you don't have to
crash into traffic intersection you
could say I have an individual body
that's good that's a me and we added we
integrated with we and you make them we
word or how are we going to say that in
different languages and then we as a way
to liberate you from the LIE of the
separate self and allows us to actually
find a new way to go to the great
turning this movement of Joanna Macy
would say is away from the great
unraveling and can let us to go away
from business as usual and I think
everyone's gonna be better for it
yeah yeah and the country state that
beautifully Dan just so beautifully
absolutely beautifully the contribution
of awareness of meaningful coincidences
is that the primary kind of meaningful
coincidences mind thinking of something
imagining something it happens in the
environment and it begins to show us an
individual daily life
that mind and environment are connected
that we are not separate from each other
we are not separate from our
surroundings being able to
like sing a song which I was singing
along a river yeah the other day and uh
I like 50 songs and I was hitting like a
low note 10 10 or low note
and right then I hear a harmonic very
much like the note I am singing and I
said hey it's joining me in this song
and it was it turned out to be a truck
going across the river the river I was
nearby but the experience of having the
external join what appeared to be the
internal is the sort of thing that for
some of us is a slow but persistent
daily reminder of mind being connected
with environment the basic message of
which is we have to dissolve our
Reliance on the belief of a separate
self
and then what do we have left and so the
message from from you Dan particularly
and I think Chris too is how do we help
people recognize their inter and
intra-connectedness
so they can find the love that's all
around us
there's love all around but I never
heard it singing no I mean there's a
love all there and it's so much fun to
be in it and all its many variations one
of the troubles I've been having is
there's so many different kinds of love
that we can experience as a gradient of
them and it's fun to try to do various
of them so being able to get out there
and connect
then would you would you separate out
for this listener hear me interconnected
versus intra-connected
sure well the the origin of that word uh
I you know I was working with these
system scientists at MIT and we um we
went on a retreat together to deepen our
experiential sense of of systems so we
were up in the Colorado mountains with
John P Milton at the way of Nature and
part of that Retreat process is to go
for three days
um by your individual selves in the
forest so you know we had our experience
and we came out after the three days and
we're together and everyone was saying
these beautiful experiences they had of
being interconnected with the forest and
being interlaced with the forest
interwoven they use tick not Hans
beautiful term inter being and then it
came time for me in the circle to speak
and I'm I'm kind of a particular person
for the meaning of words and I said you
know I resonate with everything you're
saying everybody but
the experience for this body was not so
much a betweenness it was like within
this I mean I was the creek I was the
tree I was the sky I was the body called
Dan
there was a within this to it I I I I
don't know I couldn't say interconnected
because there wasn't a separation of me
connected to that so I guess I would say
interconnected and everyone's like
nodding fine fine we went back to the
you know the place we were staying and
back to technology I turned on my
computer I want to take some notes on
the three-day experience and I kept on
writing well you know I was
interconnected and the word processor
autocorrect kept on changing it back to
interconnected so I said what's wrong
with my computer and then I looked it up
there is no such word as intra connected
you know connectedness of within and and
so I just had the feeling that you know
if we don't have a word
to speak
from the perspective and and speak on
behalf of in terms of agency or even the
subjective feeling of the whole
then we've got a problem in at least in
English but it turns out there really
isn't a word like that in many other
languages
um so so then I thought you know I need
to write some kind of appeal to our
human family that modern culture at
least in in the way we experience it now
you know has created this experience
where the self is only separate so that
would be interconnected interconnected
means you know the three of us are here
and there's connections between us
that's the inter and there's connections
and that's beautiful too so it's it's
better to have interconnection than no
connection but we need to take it one
step further to realize we can speak on
behalf of the experience of the whole a
whole forest and whatever life what I
get from just your Rift there is I like
going from intra to inter I like the
connection and the separate it's all I'm
part of it it's part of me and then I
get to experience myself as somewhat
separate but still connected exactly and
that's exactly Bernie the idea of
integration is you have a me in a body
and no one is saying get rid of it and
then you have a we in a relationality so
there's an inner and an enter and when
you put the inner and the inter together
it's the intra right so so that's a way
of just wording it and what was fun
about writing the book is you know to
take the reader on a kind of journey
together looking at lifespan development
so look at the science of self and how
it develops you know in utero in in
infancy in toddlerhood and in the early
years of school and Adolescence and
adulthood what's the resistance to
change and really trying to review not
in an academic way but just in a useful
way like what is practical about what
science has said so it's like a
synthesis of a whole bunch of Science in
a very short way to say here's what
happens across the lifespan in modern
culture
to actually be developing the false
view of a noun-like separate self-entity
and then here are the opportunities to
actually open that up not getting rid of
the individual but realizing you are
inner you are enter and you are the
wholeness of it all the intra
yeah Chris
uh just beautiful again this has been of
course the the ancient message of the
spiritual traditions and now the
scientific voice you're saying is
joining that chorus with its own
particular epistemology but the core
message is the finite self is a limit
itself it's not an ultimate self it's a
functional self the contextual self or
as the Buddha saw in his night of
Awakening he awoken and saw a self not
anywhere in the world not in him not in
anyone else and in anything else and one
when one enters this deeply into
transparency
as you say interconnected is just too
small for it interconnected it's it's a
wholeness of life where the the
beginning and ending of my life
dissolves completely in the beginning
and ending of all other lives and one
lost and are not lost are
dissolved into the the communion of life
in its totality functioning in its
beautiful individuality and yet EX
incredibly complex and balanced Harmony
in community
to experience that
if we can stabilize that experience if
we can tap into that experience and
generalize that experience and make it
part of our living culture then we
really have a foundation for a very
different culture on this planet
and I I it's so encouraged by your
description Dan and
I also think that this is happening at a
kind of a another level where
I think all of our farmer lives which
live within us into various ways just we
carry the history of the planet in our
soul we've been every race we've been
every religion but every variation and
as a planet is coming into this
cataclysmic process of compression uh we
are psychically coming into this inner
process of compression and I think that
this uh transition into a Quantum sense
of self a Quantum a sense of wholeness a
quantum entanglement and and I love that
that word from you know Dean Raiden in
his book and entangled mind
um
I think we're coming into a compression
point in history where it's just like
Extinction is an evolutionary driver and
it's a very powerful I think you're
right that the ego
yeah this is a civilization a culture
that's been built on the the ego and
which is a beautiful structure but it's
it's a it's an imprisoned self and it
leads it builds a divided world and we
don't have the luxury of a planet any
longer being Guided by an egoic
civilization even a well-intentioned
egoic civilization we need to give birth
to a higher more inclusive form of human
identity which I I think this
inclusiveness that you're pointing to
Dan also correlates with an escalated
intensity of a center integration so
that what I call the diamond Soul isn't
is a summation
individuality but it also is because its
very nature it's also a transparent
individuality it's open to the field it
lives in constant uh feedback with the
field uh
it's I don't have any
the faster we move through this crisis
the better the more we all begin to
understand what's happening and align
ourselves with becoming the kind of
being that history needs us to be
at all those levels uh then the fewer
children have to die the fewer
grandchildren will have to die
I guess I I see this price of this
crisis deepening for decades not on the
basis of psychedelic Visionary not not
at all but just in terms of
what the environmentalists are telling
us and the crisis that they seem kind of
coming at us
uh but I do think I do think it is about
releasing something Splendid in the
human heart it's about actualizing our
divine potential in a higher order a
higher register same Divine being same
Cosmic nature but actualized into a
higher self-expression and I just I'm
suing I take such strength in your
description Dan it's really uh I feel
such deep resonance with it yeah it's a
real well good I thought you might Chris
I thought you might and you have uh and
you do and I I'm just uh like
looking at my next dance step you know I
kind of I I mean I can be fairly
academic I've done it that a long time
but the next dance step I see is somehow
being able to facilitate not only the
recognition but the experience of the
self as being part of something greater
it's not just this me it's uh to me and
it's me with others it's me with nature
it's me with this whole planet it's with
me with Gaia I am part of it and you are
part of it and we are all part of it and
have that experience and I like the
differentiations that come out with
doing that that there's some there's
there's there's there's there's centers
of intra-connectedness a family is a
center of a of a mind that of which each
person is a part for example or a group
and again it dances where I get to
experience that sometime so what where
as we come to the end of this
I I really well do you guys like it or
not I don't see this as just the end of
anything here I think it's a beginning
here we've got and it's been going on
for a while anyway but here we are the
three of us talking about this and we've
got to dissolve the self at least
temporarily to be able to like uh
modulate that it's just me thing which
is
defensive right now I mean people are
doing it now being scared there's a lot
of reasons to do that I and you've
described very well I don't have to try
to do that but our mission each of us in
our own way I think is to be able to
help that singular singular identity of
self is separate from everything else
begin to have an oscillation between
self and environment and I think that's
what we're doing I think that's a
a mission we're all on in some way or
other in our own ways with our own songs
and with our own dance and our own
people our own way of doing it and each
of you have uh that as what you're doing
and I I'm so glad that we've been able
to at least get a touch of it so I I
thank each of you for for joining me in
this discussion clarifying something I
kind of knew but making it clear for
people who are listening to us that this
singular ego thing has to
be replaced with something a little more
broad but still the integration is part
of the vacillation
so I'm gonna we'll end this with each of
you having some closing comment and um
then we'll we'll stop so Dan
oh it's beautiful to be here with You
Chris and and Bernie as you know it's
it's um
it's a moment in our human evolution
when I think if we realize that a
process that
is really established called cultural
Evolution yeah it's very real
and everyone can have uh participation
in something called pervasive leadership
where every individual
can take whatever role fits with your
life
to find a way to sense into a self that
yes is inside that's the inner yes
that's connected other people and to
Nature yes but that also besides inner
and Inter is intra and this is the me
plus we is we you know term and what
what I invite everyone listening to just
consider is that cultural Evolution
happens by one person one relationship
one conversation at a time
people often quote Margaret Mead the
Anthropologist is saying you know don't
ever think that a small group of people
can't change the world because indeed
that's the only thing that ever has
so if we can just have that pervasive
leadership now you know with the
grounding in
indigenous wisdom and contemplative
teachings from thousands of years and
with the additional you know supportive
modern views from science you know we
actually can take the steps we need in
the time we can do it so
the issue is not whether we can or can't
because we can't this cultural Evolution
can happen very rapidly
the bigger question is will we and we
will because we have to well that's I'm
with you that's a big driver as a Big
Driver keep those grandchildren around
uh being able to do their thing that's
because we're part of trying to make
that happen uh Chris
but Dan I would just underscore
everything you just said and put my
initials right beside it because I
certainly believe everything you've said
uh one of the things that was shown me
along the way was
um you talked about feels and Quantum
fields and and part of my experience was
at one point that the intensity of the
global crisis we're coming into is going
to hyper stimulate our individual Fields
but the collective field of humanity yes
so it's going to drive it into
non-linear conditions we know something
about how physical Fields behave in
non-linear conditions Chaos Theory now
if we make the assumption that the
psychic field of humanity under
non-linear behavior is far from
equilibrium conditions will have some of
those same qualities then we have a way
of looking at emergence coming out of
the depths of the human psyche knew the
emergence of new forms crystallizations
of that weren't even available
previously but represent an
actualization of latent
capacities within human nature so that
feels deeply aligned with what you're
talking about and it helps us understand
how we can make as big a change as we
need to make in as short a time as we
have because in in the instability of of
a of a when we come to trick trigger
points bifurcation systems of course
very susceptible to small perturbations
so that the influence of individuals
increases the more we move into a period
of Crisis that gives added weight to
each one of our effects on the outcome
and uh yeah that's and I just I just
really support what you're saying yeah
that's really good really good
so hopefully those listening to this and
watching us will be part of uh joining
us and trying to be able to facilitate
the
intra connection that's also
interconnected and also about us
individually so thank you both for
joining me today
it's been a great discussion
thank you Bernie thank you for getting
us together
thank you Bernie thank you Chris it's
great to be with you all and this is a
it's an exciting moment and we can do
this yes
[Music]
like a hologram
you've got me consciousness
[Music]